Abstract: Space applications are complex systems that require intricate trade analyses for optimum implementations.  We focus on a subset of the trade process, using classical reliability theory and SEU data, to illustrate appropriate TMR scheme selection.  
 Using Classical Reliability Models and Single Event Upset (SEU) Data to Determine Optimum Implementation 
Schemes for Triple Modular Redundancy (TMR) in SRAM-based Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) Devices 
M. Berg1, Member IEEE, H. Kim1, A. Phan1, C. Seidleck1, K. LaBel2, Member IEEE, J. Pellish2 Member IEEE, M. Campola2 Member IEEE  
Introduction 
2.  NASA  Goddard Space Flight Center,  Code 561.4, Greenbelt, MD 20771 
National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration 
 This study investigates mitigation performance  
and risk analysis for a variety of mitigation design  
strategies.  The intention is to provide a means for  
optimum mitigation integration for critical applications.  
Risk is measured by analyzing reliability across time  
using classical reliability models and measured single  
event upset (SEU) data.  
Melanie Berg 
1.  AS&D in support of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Laurel, MD 20707 
Triple Modular Redundancy (TMR) 
 TMR schemes [3-5] are defined by which portion of the circuit is  
triplicated and where the voters are placed. 
• The strongest TMR implementation will triplicate all data-paths and apply  
separate voters to each data-path. 
• However, this can be costly: area, power, and complexity. 
• A trade is performed to determine the TMR scheme that requires the  
least amount of effort and circuitry and while meeting project  
requirements. 
• Scope of mitigation for this study is: 
     Block TMR(BTMR), Local TMR (LTMR), and Distributed TMR (DTMR).  
 In this study, reliability is also analyzed across particle fluence by  
transforming classical reliability models [1] from the time domain into the  
fluence domain.  As a benefit, analyzing mitigation in the fluence domain  
enhances the evaluation process by providing the ability to make direct  
comparisons to accelerated radiation test data (SEU data). Design  
implementation is targeted to a Sequential random access memory (SRAM)-
based field programmable gate array (FPGA) (Xilinx Kintex-7) [2].  SEU test  
data was obtained by performing heavy-ion testing at Texas A&M Cyclotron  
Facility. 
SEU Errors and Fault Correction SEU Test Methodology 
 The primary design under investigation (DUI) was the Counter Array [2] as illustrated in Figure 7. Variations of the DUI were created  
and implemented in the Xilinx Kintex-7 FPAG device ( XC7K325T-1FBG900). Heavy-ion testing was performed at Texas A&M University  
Cyclotron Facility (TAMU).    
Partitioning: SRAM-based FPGAs contain a significant number of shared resources that can become single points of failure [7].   
Consequently, designs were partitioned such that no resources were shared across TMR domains. A partitioned design is illustrated in Figure  
8.  The Xilinx floor-planner tool was used for partitioning. 
Mitigation: Evaluating mitigation strength was the primary goal of this investigation. The following is a list of DUI (counter array) variations  
that were manually developed: (1) no-mitigation (pure counters), (2) BTMR with partitioning, (3) DTMR with partitioning, and (4) DTMR without  
partitioning. One additional DUI was created by using the Synopsys’ “Synplify Premier” synthesis tool [9]. Referring to Figure 7, DTMR  
(without voter feedback) was applied to the counter-array and LTMR was applied to its snap-shop array.  We refer to this scheme as partial  
TMR (PTMR).  
Scrubbing: During testing, an external configuration memory scrubber [3] was applied to the DUT’s configuration. The configuration scrubber  
was verified for full operation during testing by performing a read-back of the DUT’s configuration memory.  Read-back should indicate  
approximately zero errors after each heavy-ion test. 
 
  
 
Analysis of SEU Test Results 
Design σSEU 
Pfs()error∝PConfiguration+P(fs)functionalLogic+PSEFIConfiguration 
σSEU 
 
Functional 
logic σSEU 
(DFF + CL)  
SEFI σSEU (Global routes 
and hidden Logic) 
  
 Because configuration SEUs are the dominant  
component faults in unhardened SRAM-based FPGAs [3]; and  
their affects to system operation are prolific, a strong TMR  
scheme (that can mask a variety of configuration SEUs) is  
required (BTMR or DTMR) [3-5].  Consequently, do not use  
LTMR with SRAM-based FPGAs as illustrated in Figure 5. 
 
 
Figure 4: Mitigation window (MW) example. 
SRAM-Based FPGA TMR Strategies: Strengths and Weaknesses  
 Equation (1) describes the four categories of SEUs in FPGAs [3]:  
Configuration, functional logic, global routes, and hidden logic. Figure 4 illustrates  
how a design can be modularized into mitigation windows (MWs). The effects of  
SEUs on MWs can be classified as follows:  
 
 
 
   
Classical Reliability 
Equation 
Reliability for 
one block 
e- λt 
 
Reliability for 
BTMR 
3 e- 2λt-2 e- 3λt 
Mean time to 
failure 
(MTTFblock) 
1/ λ 
Mean time to 
failure 
(MTTFBTMR) 
 
(5/6 λ)= 0.833/λ 
 
λ:error rate 
 BTMR is a common approach to mitigation for two  
primary reasons: 
• It requires the least number of voters (area savings) and 
• It can be applied to black-box logic (e.g., intellectual  
property (IP) cores). 
  
 
SRAM-Based FPGAs and LTMR: 
SRAM-Based FPGAs and BTMR: 
Table 1: Classical reliability models over time. 
Figure 7: Block diagram of design under investigation – Counter Array 
Figure 8: Physical layout of a partitioned TMR  
design (the same partitions were used for BTMR,  
DTMR, and PTMR). 
Block TMR(BTMR) V
O
T
I
N
G
M
A
T
R
I
X
Complex 
function 
with 
DFFs 
Copy 1 
Copy 2 
Copy 3 
CombLogic
Voter
Voter
Voter
LTMR
CombLogic CombLogic
DFF
DFF
DFF
Voter 
Voter 
Voter 
Voter 
Voter 
Voter 
Voter 
Voter 
Voter 
Local TMR (LTMR) 
Distributed TMR (DTMR) 
BTMR: Voting is only performed at the  
outputs of complex blocks.  
• Does not correct errors only masks  
them. 
• If blocks are not regularly flushed  
(e.g. reset), errors might accumulate  
– may not be an effective technique. 
 
Figure 1: BTMR [3].  Triplicate complex  
function and place voter at outputs.  
• Complex function is treated as a black-box.   
• Global route SEUs, accumulated faults (no  
correction), and shared resource SEUs (single  
points of failure) can break the mitigation  
scheme. 
Figure 2: LTMR [3].  Only DFFs are  
triplicated.  Data-paths stay singular.  
• LTMR masks upsets from DFFs and  
corrects DFF upsets if voter  
feedback is used.  
• SEUs in the data path, global route  
SEUs, and shared resource SEUs  
(single points of failure) can break  
the mitigation scheme. 
 
Figure 3: DTMR [3]. The entire design is triplicated. Voters are brought inside of the design and are placed 
after the DFFs.   
• Most SEUs are masked.   
• Errors can be corrected if voter feedback to DFFs are used. 
•  Global route SEUs, and shared resource SEUs (single points of failure) can break the mitigation scheme. 
Deliverable to NASA Electronic Parts and Packaging (NEPP) Program to be published on nepp.nasa.gov. 
• MW boundaries: Start at a voter-output or a device input; 
End at a DFF-voter pair or a device output 
• Internal MW elements can be CL or DFFs (i.e., if a DFF does 
not have a voter, then it is not a MW boundary) 
TMR Mitigation Window Definition  
110 
DFF  Voter CL CL CL CL DFF 
DFF  Voter CL CL CL CL DFF 
DFF  Voter CL CL CL CL DFF 
Voter 
Voter 
Voter 
DFF  Voter CL CL DFF 
DFF  Voter CL CL DFF 
DFF  Voter CL CL DFF 
Voter 
Voter 
Voter 
Voter DFF 
Voter DFF 
Voter DFF 
CL 
CL 
CL 
DFF 
DFF 
DFF 
• The SEU in associated with an unused resource or disabled logic and consequently does not affect system  
operation. 
• The SEU fault only affects one of the TMR triplet copies within the same mitigation window (MW). If only one  
triplet copy has a fault, then the MW will either (a) mask the fault or (b) mask and correct the fault.  
• The SEU fault affects multiple triplet copies within the same MW. If more than one of the triplet copies are  
affected by an SEU, then the MW will malfunction and the fault will not be masked from the system.  This is a  
common error signature of global route SEUs or configuration SEUs that control shared resources. 
 BTMR is a fairly strong mitigation strategy for flushable designs; i.e.,  
feed-forward or highly-resettable circuits (as illustrated in Figure 6).  It is also  
considered a strong application when requirements dictate short time intervals of  
correct operation.  
 Table 1 lists the classical reliability and Mean time to failure (MTTF)  
models [1] for an unmitigated design versus the corresponding BTMR  
implementation.  If a mission’s requirements dictate that BTMR shall reliably  
operate for a length of time near the time of failure for one unmitigated block,  
then BTMR becomes a weak mitigation scheme.  This is because over time, the  
reliability of the BTMR scheme drops off faster than the unmitigated. Table 1  
shows: MTTFblock  > MTTFBTMR. 
 
 
Voter 
TRANSMIT 
TRANSMIT 
TRANSMIT 
RESET 
Figure 6: Flushable BTMR system. 
7/7/15, 8:03 AMattachment.ashx 2,071×1,576 pixels
Page 1 of 1https://mail02.ndc.nasa.gov/owa/attachment.ashx?id=RgAAAABoK…t=1&attid0=BAAAAAAA&attcid0=image001.png%4001D0B806.9A3FA040
Figure 9: Integral LET spectra for GCR during solar 
maximum and solar minimum [8]. 
Counter 0 
Counter 1 
Counter 2 
Counter 198 
Counter 199 
Counter 1 
Counter 2 
Counter 199 
Counter 198 
Low 
Cost 
Digital 
Tester 
(LCDT) 
200 independent counters 
operating at full speed  
Snap-Shot: Mechanism for Counter-Array Output to 
Tester.  Tester can only see Snap-shot Counter 0.  
8 bit output Counter 0 
Snap-Shot Array Counter-Array 
SEU Test Results  
Mitigation Strength 
 Given the counter-array DUI and based on σSEU data from Figure 10,  
DTMR with partitioning is the strongest mitigation strategy.  This result is as  
expected.  At the lower LETs, DTMR σSEU data has greater than one decade of  
improvement versus BTMR and over two decades versus no-mitigation.   
 As LET increases, the mitigation strategies start to converge in  
performance.  This is because of the dominance of global route SEUs at higher  
LETs.  Global route SEUs are a common factor for failure in all three strategies. 
 It was interesting to observe that there was not a significant difference  
between DTMR with partitioning and DTMR without partitioning. Potential  
explanations for the insignificant difference in σSEU data are the following: there  
may be hidden shared resources beyond the control of the floor-planner  
(partitioning tool), global routes may have a strong significance, and the DUI’s  
isolated independent modules may play a role.  As future work, this will be further  
investigated using a variety of DUIs and fault injection. 
 PTMR proved to be weaker than the system with no mitigation as LET  
increased.  This is because LTMR was applied to the snap-shot register.  As  
previously mentioned, LTMR should not be used with SRAM-based FPGAs.   
BTMR and Reliability Models 
 In this investigation (counter-array DUI), BTMR performed better than  
expected; i.e., it’s MFTF was higher (in all tested LETs) than the unmitigated  
design.  This can be attributed to the fact that the DUI was made of 200 small  
independent modules (counters) and one large flushable structure (snap-shot  
array).  Results closer to the reliability model predictions are expected to occur  
with DUIs that have one large MW with strong co-dependencies between  
modules. However, better results are expected with DUIs that are purely flushable.  
BTMR and Availability 
 Regarding Figure 13, while the BTMR σSEU data can be used to  
characterize mitigation failure, the one-out-of-three can be used to assess  
availability.  The premise is that when one copy fails, another is assumed to fail  
soon.  Subsequently, BTMR schemes require the system to halt or shut down  
upon one-out-of-three failure.  During this time, the system either flushes or the  
failed copied is serviced.  This affects availability and is of critical concern for  
satisfying mission requirements. Further discussion is in the paper. 
 
Conclusion 
Acknowledgements 
References 
 The conversion process from σSEU data to error-rates tends to lose  
valuable information regarding data trends across low LET.  Hence, an analysis in  
the fluence domain was performed by transforming classical reliability models from  
the time domain to the fluence domain.  The conversion is as follows: replace error-
rates (λ) with heavy-ion accelerated testing σSEU d a t a  (λèσSEU) and time with  
fluence (tèΦ). This transformation was performed to improve lower-LET analysis  
of mitigation strategies. 
 As expected, DTMR was the strongest mitigation scheme.  However, there  
is interesting data that show DTMR without partitioning performed almost as  
well as DTMR with partitioning.  This will be further investigated with altering DUI  
MW size, creating more co-dependent internal-MW modules, and fault injection. 
 σSEU data and reliability models illustrated the strengths and weaknesses of  
BTMR.  Data show that it is important to take into account the mission’s required  
operational time and availability prior to selecting BTMR as the system’s mitigation  
strategy. 
 An important result was observed with PTMR.  The data showed that a  
poor choice of mitigation application can cause the system to be more  
susceptible than a system with no mitigation. 
This work was supported in part by the NASA Electronic Parts and Packaging (NEPP) Program and the 
Defense Threat Reduction Agency.   
 
See paper. 
Figure 13: BTMR availability: BTMR failure; versus failure with 
no mitigation; versus any one failure out of the BTMR copies. 
Figure 10: Comparison of MFTF for all mitigation strategies. 
Figure 12: Reliability across particle fluence: 
Zoomed-in low fluence region of Figure 11. 
Figure 11: Reliability across particle fluence: 
BTMR versus System with No Mitigation. 
To be presented by Melanie Berg at the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Nuclear and Space Radiation Effects Conference (NSREC), Boston, Massachusetts, July 13-17, 2015.  
SEU cross-section (σSEU)  DFF: Flip flop CL: combinatorial logic Single event functional interrupt: SEFI 
DFF: Flip flop  
CL: combinatorial logic 
CL CL CL 
DFF 
DFF 
DFF 
CL CL CL 
R
O
U
T
I
N
G
 
M
A
T
R
I
X
I1 I2 I3 I4 
LUT 
Look Up Table: LUT 
Q
QSET
CLR
D
Q
QSET
CLR
D
Q
QSET
CLR
D
I1 I2 I3 I4 
LUT 
I1 I2 I3 I4 
LUT 
I1 I2 I3 I4 
LUT 
Voter 
Figure 5: Block diagram of LTMR in an SRAM-based FPGA.  With 
LTMR, there exists too many other configuration bits + logic (beyond 
the protected DFFs) that can be corrupted by an SEU.  Applied 
mitigation needs to be stronger for SRAM-based FPGA devices. 
(1) 
1.0E+00 
1.0E+01 
1.0E+02 
1.0E+03 
1.0E+04 
1.0E+05 
1.0E+06 
5.7 20.6 41.2 
MFTF 
LET (MeV!cm2/mg) 
DTMR 
PTMR 
BTMR 
Pure Counters 
DTMR-No-
Partition 
Note: PTMR has poor 
results: used no 
feedback DTMR and 
LTMR in some areas. 
Unexpected result: 
MFTF for DTMR-No-
Partition is near 
DTMR-with-Partition! 
Good news. 
1.0E+00 
1.0E+01 
1.0E+02 
1.0E+03 
1.0E+04 
1.0E+05 
5.7 20.6 41.2 
MFTF 
LET MeV*cm2/mg 
BTMR 
Pure Counters 
BTMR One Out 
of Three 
0.8 
0.82 
0.84 
0.86 
0.88 
0.9 
0.92 
0.94 
0.96 
0.98 
1 
0 200 400 600 
Relibilty 
Fluence Φ  (particle/cm2) 
0"
0.1"
0.2"
0.3"
0.4"
0.5"
0.6"
0.7"
0.8"
0.9"
1"
0" 5000"10000"15000"20000"
Relibilty 
Fluence Φ  (particles/cm2) 
- System No TMR: e-(σSEU)Φ 
- BTMR System : 3e-2(σSEU) Φ-2e-3(σSEU)Φ 
@LET = 5.7 MeV!cm2/mg:  
MFTF=σSEU=1.0e-4 cm2/design 
For the projected BTMR design,  
reliability drops below 99% 
between 600-700 particles with an 
LET = 5.7 MeV!cm2/mg. 
 The traditional approach to SEU data analysis and characterization is to convert σSEU data to error-rates.  However, during the  
conversion process (from the fluence (Φ) domain to the time (t) domain), important information in the lower LET region is lost.  Referring to  
Figure 9, there is a significant difference of particle flux when comparing lower LET particles to higher.  Subsequently, in order to perform a  
comparison of mitigation efficiency, it is important to investigate behavior at lower LET without loss of information.  For this reason, we replace  
error-rates (λ) with σSEU data (λèσSEU) and time with fluence (tèΦ ) to convert classical reliability models from the t-domain to the Φ-domain.  
σSEU data from Figure 10 can be used as the variables in the Table 1 equations to obtain the reliability graphs shown in Figure 11 and Figure  
12.  
mitigation fails 
and data is not as 
expected 
one of the three 
copies has failed 
but mitigation is 
not broken.  
No Mitigation 
